Add Knowledge Base docs (#13)
optakt/optakt.github.io: content/knowledge_base/flare/consensus/avalanche/specification.md

# Avalanche

An internet-scale electronic payment system, evaluated in a large scale deployment, based on the Snow family of algorithms.

> The system's bottleneck is transaction verification.

Author: Added a longer and more friendly description here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R4-R5
Thanks! Please let me know if you think it is not clear enoough

> The system's bottleneck is transaction verification.

Reviewer: I left a comment on the commit, but since those sometimes get forgotten I'll add it here as well:

It's not forbidden, but [unusual to start a sentence with `But` in English](http://sites.utexas.edu/legalwriting/2020/05/01/beginning-with-but/#:~:text=There's%20no%20rule%20against%20beginning,But%20it%20rained%20that%20day.).

WDYT of writing something like this instead:

```diff
-But the validation of transaction scripts, UTXO references and related specifics is left to the application implementation.
+However, the validation of transaction scripts, UTXO references and related specifics is left to the application implementation.
```

> The system's bottleneck is transaction verification.

Author: Yes, I remember that now, fixed here
https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/dabd2c202a116853e67790cba4e525784f3d09d1
Thanks!

> A more thorough description of Avalanche specifications can be found in [Avalanche Whitepaper](https://assets-global.website-files.com/5d80307810123f5ffbb34d6e/6009805681b416f34dcae012_Avalanche%20Consensus%20Whitepaper.pdf)

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R7
Thanks!

TODO: elaborate more on the introduction

## Characteristics

The Avalanche network operates with multiple single-decree instances (nodes), meaning that each instance can make a decision on only one value.
Nodes use the [Snowball algorithm](./concepts.md#Snow-Algorithm-Group-of-Protocols) for their decision-making process.
In the case of a payment system and Avalanche, the Snowball logic used to determine a value is the process of deciding whether a transaction is valid.

> The protocol maintains the set of all known transactions using a dynamic, append-only Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure.

Author: We have a DAG definition in the glossary, I will add it to it.Thanks!

> The protocol maintains the set of all known transactions using a dynamic, append-only Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) structure.

Author: Added the link to the glossary custom definition https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/3495fab15d48fd58092b6396188990fc20e2177c#diff-e77cfdf99e3d26834c46501127cb0279d60366b93a3afffc6c90fcd65286b6a4R14
Thanks!

There are two main positives from this:

> * DAG helps streamlining the path on which there are no conflicting transactions — a single vote on a DAG vertex implicitly votes for all transactions on the path to the genesis vertex

Author: This has been updated here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R19
Thanks!

> * using the same principle as BTC, the DAG tree renders past decisions on the path of transactions as more and more difficult to undo without approval of the correct nodes

Author: Yes, missed this

> * using the same principle as BTC, the DAG tree renders past decisions on the path of transactions as more and more difficult to undo without approval of the correct nodes

Author: Here is also correction from previous comment https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/3495fab15d48fd58092b6396188990fc20e2177c#diff-e77cfdf99e3d26834c46501127cb0279d60366b93a3afffc6c90fcd65286b6a4R9
Thanks!

> * using the same principle as BTC, the DAG tree renders past decisions on the path of transactions as more and more difficult to undo without approval of the correct nodes

Author: Corrected to Bitcoin Network https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R21
Thanks!

The genesis block in the DAG structure is represented by the graph first link, called "genesis vertex".
This is the point where the first two edges of the graph meet.

When a new transaction is created, its parents are defined in the DAG structure as its ancestors and the trascation is their newly created descendant.
The parent-child relationship in DAG is not mandatory for a child transaction may not have any relation to its parents transactions outputs.
It can actually spend funds received in other transactions from its "ancestor set".

> The [ancestor set](../../../glossary.md#Ancestor-Set) is the set of all transactions reachable via parent edges throughout history.

Author: Yes, I added the first sentence later and missed it, fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R27
Thanks!

Oppositely — the term "progeny" means all existing (and potentially existing) children transactions and their children.

The main purpose of a consensus protocol is to avoid the inclusion of conflicting transactions into the ledger.
Even though the characteristics of a conflicting transaction are defined on an application level (ex. transactions that spend same UTXO), the notion of conflict can be abstracted in order to define the conflicting set.
In Avalanche, every transaction belongs to a conflict set.

> This set consists of multiple transactions that are invalid towards each other or it is a singleton set - then it contains a single transaction (in the case of a cirtuous transaction).

Author: This typo is fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R34
Thanks!

Since reaching a consensus means to avoid any conflicts between transactions, only one transaction from each conflict set can be included in the approved path of transactions.

Avalanche instantiates a Snowball instance for each conflict set.

> Avalanche treats the concept of repeated queries and multiple counters from Snowball taking advantage of DAG structure.

Author: Added here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R38
Thanks!

Specifically, when a transaction `T` is queried, all of its ancestors reachable through the DAG edges from it are implicitly part of the query.
Consequently, nodes would respond positively to a query for transaction `T` only if `T` and all of its ancestors are the preferred option in their respective conflict sets.
If more than a given threshold of responders vote positively, the transactions gets a [chit](../../../glossary.md#Chit).
After that nodes compute their level of confidence as the sum of transaction chit and the chits its progeny, meaning they query the transaction just once and rely on new vertices and possible chits added to the progeny to build up their confidence.

Described ties are broken in case of preference for first-seen transactions. TODO: explain this
Chits can also be decoupled from the DAG structure, making the protocol immune to attacks where the attacker generates large padded subgraphs.

## Consensus Specification

> Each node `u` keeps track of all transactions it has learned about in set Tu. The set Tu is [partitioned](../../../glossary.md#Partition-of-a-Set) into mutually exclusive conflict sets - PT (partition of 'T'), and PT ∈ Tu.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Each node `u` keeps track of all transactions it has learned about in set `Tu`. The set `Tu` is [partitioned](../../../glossary.md#Partition-of-a-Set) into mutually exclusive conflict sets — `PT` (partition of `T`), and `PT ∈ Tu`.
```

> Since conflicts are [transitive](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Relation), if PTi and PTj are conflicting they belong to the same conflict set of transactions — PTi = PTj.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since conflicts are [transitive](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Relation), if `PTi` and `PTj` are conflicting, they belong to the same conflict set of transactions — `PTi = PTj`.
```

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R50
Thanks!

> Conflicting transation have the equivalence relation because they are equivocations spending the same UTXO.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R51
Thanks!

> The parent connection to T' from T is expressed as `T' <— T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parent connection to `T'` from `T` is expressed as `T' <— T`.
```

Author: Added the corrections here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R53
Thanks!

> The relation `T' *<— T` is its reflexive [transitive closure](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Closuse-of-a-Graph) meaning that there is path from T to T'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The relation `T' *<— T` is its reflexive [transitive closure](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Closuse-of-a-Graph) meaning that there is a path from `T` to `T'`.
```

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R54
Thanks!

> If T' <— T, then every node in the system that has T will also have T' and will know about the same relation `T' <— T`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `T' <— T`, then every node in the system that has `T` also has `T'` and knows about the same relation `T' <— T`.
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R55
Thanks!

> If such a relation between these transactions do not exist, then no node will end up with T' <— T.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If such a relation between these transactions do not exist, then no node ends up with `T' <— T`.
```

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R56
Thanks!

DAGs built in different nodes are guaranteed to be compatible, though at any moment in time they might not have a complete view of all vertices in the system.

> Each node can compute a confidence value `d U (T)` (confidence value for node `u` about transaction `T`) from the progeny as the sum of transaction T decendants cihts from the progeny and its own chit.

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R59
Thanks!

Each transaction initially has a chit of 0 before the node gets the query results.

> If the node collects a threshold of α 'yes' votes from the query the value of transaction T chit is set to 1, otherwise it will stay foerever 0.

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R61
Thanks!

A chit value reflect the result from a single query of its associated transaction and becomes immutable afterwards, while confidence `d` can increase as the DAG grows by collecting more chits in its progeny.

> Additionally each node maintains its own local list of known nodes: Nu — nodes known to `u` is a subset of the set of all existing nodes: `Nu ⊆ N`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additionally, each node maintains its own local list of known nodes: Nu — nodes known to `u` is a subset of the set of all existing nodes: `Nu ⊆ N`.
```

Author: Added the comma here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R63
Thanks!

Each node implements an event-driven state machine, centered around a query that serves both to solicit votes on each transaction and to notify other nodes of the existence of newly discovered transactions.

> When a node `u` discovers a trancation `T` through a query, it starts a one-time query process by sampling k random peers and sending a message to them, after T is delivered to the node by onReceiveTx.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a node `u` discovers a transaction `T` through a query, it starts a one-time query process by sampling `k` random peers and sending a message to them, after `T` is delivered to the node by the `onReceiveTx` callback.
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R66
Thanks!

> Node `u` answers a query by checking whether each T' such that `T' *<— T` is currently prefered among competing transactions `∀T'' ∈ PT'` from conflict set P of T'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Node `u` answers a query by checking whether each `T'` such that `T' *<— T` is currently preferred among competing transactions `∀T'' ∈ PT'` from conflict set `P` of `T'`.
```

Author: Corrected here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R67
Thanks!

> If every single ancestor T' fulfills this criterion, the transation is said to br strongly preferred and receives a yes-vote (1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If every single ancestor `T'` fulfills this criterion, the transaction is said to be strongly preferred and receives a yes-vote (1).
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R68
Thanks!

> A failure on this criterion at any T' yields a no-vote (0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A failure on this criterion at any `T'` yields a no-vote (0).
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R69
Thanks!

> When `u` accumulates k responses, it checks whether there are α yes-votes for T, and if so grants the chit value (cT = 1).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When `u` accumulates `k` responses, it checks whether there are `α` yes-votes for `T`, and if so grants the chit value (`cT = 1`).
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R70
Thanks!

> This process will yield a labeling of the DAG with a chit value and associated confidence for each transaction T.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This process yields a labeling of the DAG with a chit value and associated confidence for each transaction `T`.
```

See Markdown guidelines: _Do not use the future tense but use present simple for expressing general truths instead._

Author: Yes, missed this spot.
I corrected it https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R71
Thanks!

Example of (chit,confidence) values:

```text

T1(1,6)
├── T2(1,5)
│    ├── T4(1,2) ── T8(1,1)
│    │               │
│    └────────────── T5(1,3)
│                    └──── T9(1,1)
│
└── T3(0,0)
    ├── T6(0,0)
    └── T7(0,0)

> ```

Reviewer: Is there a need for the leading/trailing newlines in this code block?

Author: No, I'll remove them, thanks!

Author: Removed the newlines https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98L75

> Conflict set P for T1 has one element T1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conflict set `P` for `T1` has one element `T1`.
```

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R89
Thanks!

> Conflict set P for T2 and T3 has two elements {T2, T3}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conflict set `P` for `T2` and `T3` has two elements `{T2, T3}`.
```

Author: This is foxed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R90
Thanks!

> Conflict set P for T5, T6 and T9 has 3 elements {T6, T7, T9}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` has 3 elements `{T6, T7, T9}`.
```

Author: This has been fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R91
Thanks!

> Similar to Snowball, sampling in Avalanche will create a positive feedback for the preference of a single transaction in its conflict set.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to Snowball, sampling in Avalanche creates a positive feedback for the preference of a single transaction in its conflict set.
```

Author: Fixed with Present Simple tense https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R93
Thanks!

> When a transaction has a larger confidence its decendants are likely to collect chits in the future compared to others with lower confidence.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a transaction has a larger confidence, its descendants are likely to collect chits in the future compared to others with lower confidence.
```

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R94
Thanks!

> For example T2 has larger confidence than T3 and its decendants are more likely to collect chits in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example `T2` has higher confidence than `T3` and its descendants are more likely to collect chits in the future.
```

Author: This has been fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R95
Thanks!

Similar to Bitcoin, Avalanche leaves determining the acceptance point of a transaction to the application.
Committing a transaction can be performed through a safe early commitment.

> For virtuous transactions, T is accepted when it is the only transaction in its confliict set and has a confidence no less than a threshold of β1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For virtuous transactions, `T` is accepted when it is the only transaction in its conflict set and has a confidence no less than a threshold of `β1`.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R99
Thanks!

If a virtuous transaction fails to get accepted due to a problem with parents, it could be accepted if reissued with different parents.

### Transaction Entangling

> How Avalance entangles transactions:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How Avalanche entangles transactions:
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R104
Thanks!

```text
init:
    `Set T` = Ø set of known transactions (empty set)
    Q = Ø set of queried transactions (empty set)

generateTx:
    edges = {T' <— T: T' ∈ parentSelection(`Set T`)}
    T = Tx(data, edges)
    onReceiveEvent(T)

> onReceiveEvent(t)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
onReceiveEvent(t):
```

Author: This is corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R116
Thanks!

    if T ∉ `Set T` then
        if PT (conflict set of T) = Ø then
            PT = {T}, Pt.pref = T
            PT.last = T, PT.cnt = 0
        else PT = PT U {T}

>         `Set T` = T U {T}, cT = 0

Reviewer 2: This indentation is kinda confusing IMO.

Author: What do you mean?
The last line is inside the outer if according to the specification

Reviewer 2: The body of the else in the same line and then the line after it, right after it

Reviewer 2: The body of the else in the same line, and the line after it could be spaced from it.

Author: Added the line here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/9790ffc91fd20cabda53cf950546e21f37f496f8#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R123
Thanks!

> ```

Reviewer: What is this syntax? Is it pseudocode? It kind of looks like Pascal-style pseudocode so I don't really know which syntax highlighter to suggest using here.

Author: It is a pseudocode yes, the original looks like this:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/94193030/142905628-f86ac8bf-e844-431b-ae13-7c1e233554b8.png)

Reviewer: I guess we can leave it without syntax highlighting then 🤷

### Node Main Loop

Protocol main loop executed by each node:

```text
AvalancheLoop:
    while true do
        find T that satisfies T ∈ `Set T` AND T ∉ Q
        K = sample(N\u, k)
        P = SUM(v ∈ k) query(v, T)

        if P ≥ α then
            cT = 1 (chit for transaction T)
            update preferences for ancestors:
            for T' ∈ `Set T`: T' *<— T do
                if T' confidence is larger than the confidence of preferred transation T` in the P conflict set - update the prefered transaction of the set:
                if d(T') > d(PT'.pref) then
                    PT'.pref = T'
                if T' is not the last transaction in the T' conflict set - update the last place with it
                if T' ≠ PT'.last then
                    PT'.last = T', PT'.cnt=1
                else
                    ++PT'.cnt
        else
            for T' ∈ `Set T`: T' *<— T do
                PT'.cnt = 0

            otherwise confidence cnt remains 0 forever
            Q = Q U {T} - mark T as queried
```

In each iteration the node tries to select a transaction that has not yet been queried.

> If no such transaction exists, the loop will stall until a new transation is added to the Set T.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If no such transaction exists, the loop stalls until a new transaction is added to `Set T`.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R159
Thanks!

> The node then select k number of peers and queries them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The node then selects a number of peers `k` and queries them.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a the new transaction is added, the node then select a number of peers `k` and queries them.
```

Author: Updated here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R160
Thanks!

> If more than α of these peers return a positive response, the chit value is set to 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If more than `α` of these peers return a positive response, the chit value is set to `1`.
```

Author: This is fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R161
Thanks!

> After this tep the loop updates the prefered transaction of each conflict set of the transactions in its ancestry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After this step, the loop updates the preferred transaction of each conflict set of the transactions in its ancestry.
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R162
Thanks!

> Next, T is added to the set Q of queried transactions so it will never be queried again by the node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Next, `T` is added to the set `Q` of queried transactions so it is never queried again by the node.
```

Author: Fixed here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/e0e27e6be8c0aef4153af5e2add9722380c23a59#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R163
Thanks!

### Query for Transaction

> What happens when a node receives a query for transaction T from peer j:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happens when a node receives a query for transaction `T` from peer `j`:
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R168
Thanks!

```text
isPreferred(T)
    return T = PT.pref

isStronglyPreferred(T)
    return ∀T' ∈ `Set T`, T' *<— T : isPreferred(T')

isAccepted(T)
    return
        ((∀T' ∈ `Set T`, T' <— T: isAccepted(T'))
            ∩ |PT|=1 ∩ PT.cnt ≥ β1)  safe early commitment
        ∪ (PT.cnt ≥ β2)              consecutive counter

onQuery(j, T)
    onReceiveTx(T)

>     respond(, isStronglyPreferred(T))

Reviewer: In other code blocks, functions were defined with the keyword `procedure` and followed by a semicolon. Why is it not the case here? I'm very confused as to what language is used to describe those algorithms haha

Author: Not sure what you mean, I have used 'procedure' anywhere.

Author: Semicolon were missing because I missed them here, added https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/993d3f700e85aaa7570bdbd31106fc78b8090933#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R171
Thanks!

Reviewer: My bad, I was confusing it with the Avalanche whitepaper pseudocode :p It's all good as it is now then for me :)

```

> Firt step is to add transaction T to `Set T` unless it is already included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first step is to add transaction `T` to `Set T` unless it is already included.
```

Author: Corrected https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R188
Thanks!

> Atfer that step `u` determines in T is currently strongly preferred, and if it is `u` returns a positive response to peer `j`, otherwise returns a negative response.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After that step, `u` determines whether `T` is currently strongly preferred, in which case `u` returns a positive response to peer `j`, otherwise it returns a negative response.
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R189
Thanks!

> In the example pseudocode it is assumed that if a node knows about T, then it recursively knows about T ancestry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example pseudocode it is assumed that if a node knows about `T`, then it recursively knows about `T`'s ancestry.
```

By recursively knows, do you mean that it needs to do a recursive function call to fetch `T`'s ancestry? I might have missed something here 🤔

Author: No, the DAG is used to batch queries for children and parents in order to escape recursive querying.
Here what is meant is that the node knows about each step to next/previous in the ancestry/progeny line.
When I read it now, it makes sense to be updated though

Added the quotation marks here https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R190
Thanks!

> This can be achieved by postponing the delivery of T until its entire ancestry is recursively fetched (in practice an additional gossip process that disseminates the transaction is used in parallel).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be achieved by postponing the delivery of `T` until its entire ancestry is recursively fetched (in practice an additional gossip process that disseminates the transaction is used in parallel).
```

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/feb634318c2fa35f9a26038da3fcf0a5472292ac#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R191
Thanks!

## Characteristics

The Avalanche network operates with multiple single-decree instances (nodes), meaning that each instance can make a decision on only one value.
Nodes use the [Snowball algorithm](./concepts.md#Snow-Algorithm-Group-of-Protocols) for their decision-making process.
In the case of a payment system and Avalanche, the Snowball logic used to determine a value is the process of deciding whether a transaction is valid.

The protocol maintains the set of all known transactions using a dynamic, append-only [Directed Acyclic Graph](../../../glossary.md#Directed-Acyclic-Graph-(DAG)) (DAG) structure.
There are two main positives from this:

* DAG streamlines the path on which there are no conflicting transactions — a single vote on a DAG vertex implicitly votes for all transactions on the path to the genesis vertex
* using the same principle as Bitcoin Network (BTC), the DAG tree renders past decisions on the path of transactions as more and more difficult to undo without approval of the correct nodes

The genesis block in the DAG structure is represented by the graph first link, called "genesis vertex".
This is the point where the first two edges of the graph meet.

> When a new transaction is created, its parents are defined in the DAG structure as its ancestors and the trascation is their newly created descendant.

Author: Fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/30bbcc04d9918430de67e7a676ea9b06512f1211#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R26
Thanks!

Even though the characteristics of a conflicting transaction are defined on an application level (ex. transactions that spend same UTXO), the notion of conflict can be abstracted in order to define the conflicting set.
In Avalanche, every transaction belongs to a conflict set.
This set consists of multiple transactions that are invalid towards each other or it is a singleton set - then it contains a single transaction (in the case of a virtuous transaction).
Since reaching a consensus means to avoid any conflicts between transactions, only one transaction from each conflict set can be included in the approved path of transactions.

Avalanche instantiates a Snowball instance for each conflict set.
Avalanche treats the concept of repeated queries and multiple counters from Snowball taking advantage of the DAG structure.
Specifically, when a transaction `T` is queried, all of its ancestors reachable through the DAG edges from it are implicitly part of the query.
Consequently, nodes would respond positively to a query for transaction `T` only if `T` and all of its ancestors are the preferred option in their respective conflict sets.

> If more than a given threshold of responders vote positively, the transactions gets a [chit](../../../glossary.md#Chit).

Author: Yes it is the current transaction that gets a chit.
I am not sure what do you mean though - I see it is "gets" for the single entity, or you meant something else is wrong?

> If more than a given threshold of responders vote positively, the transactions gets a [chit](../../../glossary.md#Chit).

Reviewer 3: It's just that in the current text it says "the transactionS getS a chit". Then the first one should be singular:
```suggestion
If more than a given threshold of responders vote positively, the transaction gets a [chit](../../../glossary.md#Chit).
```

It's essentially a nitpick, but also kind of confusing since to me as a noob it sounded like it might be that multiple transactions get one.

> If more than a given threshold of responders vote positively, the transactions gets a [chit](../../../glossary.md#Chit).

Author: Didn't see it, here is fixed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/79725b8076afee96d306b3736ea7fb3bef44c231#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R42
Thanks!

## Consensus Specification

Each node `u` keeps track of all transactions it has learned about in set `Tu`. The set `Tu` is [partitioned](../../../glossary.md#Partition-of-a-Set) into mutually exclusive conflict sets — `PT` (partition of `T`), and `PT ∈ Tu`.
Since conflicts are [transitive](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Relation), if `PTi` and `PTj` are conflicting, they belong to the same conflict set of transactions — `PTi = PTj`.
Conflicting transactions have the equivalence relation because they are equivocations spending the same UTXO.

The parent connection to `T'` from `T` is expressed as `T' <— T`.
The relation `T' *<— T` is its reflexive [transitive closure](../../../glossary.md#Transitive-Closuse-of-a-Graph) meaning that there is a path from `T` to `T'`.
If `T' <— T`, then every node in the system that has `T` also has `T'` and knows about the same relation `T' <— T`.
If such a relation between these transactions do not exist, then no node ends up with `T' <— T`.

DAGs built in different nodes are guaranteed to be compatible, though at any moment in time they might not have a complete view of all vertices in the system.

> Each node can compute a confidence value `d U (T)` (confidence value for node `u` about transaction `T`) from the progeny as the sum of transaction T descendants chits from the progeny and its own chit.

Author: Yes, I obviously got lost in the description

> Each node can compute a confidence value `d U (T)` (confidence value for node `u` about transaction `T`) from the progeny as the sum of transaction T descendants chits from the progeny and its own chit.

Author: Maybe this looks more clear:
https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/30bbcc04d9918430de67e7a676ea9b06512f1211#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R60

> Each node can compute a confidence value `d U (T)` (confidence value for node `u` about transaction `T`) from the progeny as the sum of transaction T descendants chits from the progeny and its own chit.

Author: > To me this looks great..
> 
> I'm not an authority on the matter so I left comments more for the sake of my understanding and clarification, than to correct anything.
> 
> Alongside that, there are a few typos I pointed out. Overall great work, I learned a lot!

Thanks :)

When a node `u` discovers a transaction `T` through a query, it starts a one-time query process by sampling `k` random peers and sending a message to them, after `T` is delivered to the node by the `onReceiveTx` callback.
Node `u` answers a query by checking whether each `T'` such that `T' *<— T` is currently preferred among competing transactions `∀T'' ∈ PT'` from conflict set `P` of `T'`.
If every single ancestor `T'` fulfills this criterion, the transaction is said to be strongly preferred and receives a yes-vote (1).
A failure on this criterion at any `T'` yields a no-vote (0).
When `u` accumulates `k` responses, it checks whether there are `α` yes-votes for `T`, and if so grants the chit value (`cT = 1`).
This process yields a labeling of the DAG with a chit value and associated confidence for each transaction `T`.

Example of (chit,confidence) values:

```text
T1(1,6)
├── T2(1,5)
│    ├── T4(1,2) ── T8(1,1)
│    │               │
│    └────────────── T5(1,3)
│                    └──── T9(1,1)
│
└── T3(0,0)
    ├── T6(0,0)
    └── T7(0,0)
```

Conflict set `P` for `T1` has one element `T1`.

> Conflict set `P` for `T1` has one element `T1`.

Author: Removed https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/30bbcc04d9918430de67e7a676ea9b06512f1211#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R89
Thanks !

Conflict set `P` for `T2` and `T3` has two elements `{T2, T3}`.

> Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` has 3 elements `{T6, T7, T9}`.

Author: Yes, the connection is this
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/94193030/143479872-0dd55a1f-5244-4360-b3e6-5368714794fc.png)

But it seems I couldn't explain it better; I'll have some better explanation

> Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` has 3 elements `{T6, T7, T9}`.

Reviewer 3: But isn't the conflict set {`T6`, `T7`, `T9`}? In the text it says "Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` is...". It's the T5 vs T9 that's confusing me.

From the image it seems like the conflict set for T5 is a singleton set, consisting only of T5? Or am I misunderstanding everything 😅

> Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` has 3 elements `{T6, T7, T9}`.

Author: Yes, because I explained it wrongly, now realized that - its about transactions Y9, T6 and T7; will fix it

> Conflict set `P` for `T5`, `T6` and `T9` has 3 elements `{T6, T7, T9}`.

Author: Here is fixed I think https://github.com/optakt/optakt.github.io/pull/13/commits/79725b8076afee96d306b3736ea7fb3bef44c231#diff-2d4f16e70781857aec6689a748ad155e45611b81f184aee076bb139890410b98R91

Committing a transaction can be performed through a safe early commitment.
For virtuous transactions, `T` is accepted when it is the only transaction in its conflict set and has a confidence no less than a threshold of `β1`.
If a virtuous transaction fails to get accepted due to a problem with parents, it could be accepted if reissued with different parents.

### Transaction Entangling

How Avalanche entangles transactions:

```text
init:
    `Set T` = Ø set of known transactions (empty set)
    Q = Ø set of queried transactions (empty set)

generateTx:
    edges = {T' <— T: T' ∈ parentSelection(`Set T`)}
    T = Tx(data, edges)
    onReceiveEvent(T)

onReceiveEvent(t):
    if T ∉ `Set T` then
        if PT (conflict set of T) = Ø then
            PT = {T}, Pt.pref = T
            PT.last = T, PT.cnt = 0
        else PT = PT U {T}

        `Set T` = T U {T}, cT = 0
```

Because transactions that generate and consume the same UTXO do not conflict with each other, any transaction can be reissued with different parents.

### Node Main Loop

Protocol main loop executed by each node:

```text
AvalancheLoop:
    while true do
        find T that satisfies T ∈ `Set T` AND T ∉ Q

>         K = sample(N\u, k)

Author: This means `u` not being from N set - since this is a pseudo code -> the reference of `u` in the list of peers must not be a member of N (natural numbers) where N is from there the k comes from

>         K = sample(N\u, k)

Reviewer 3: Aaaah, right. Okay, that makes sense.

If more than `α` of these peers return a positive response, the chit value is set to `1`.
After this step, the loop updates the preferred transaction of each conflict set of the transactions in its ancestry.
Next, `T` is added to the set `Q` of queried transactions so it is never queried again by the node.

### Query for Transaction

What happens when a node receives a query for transaction `T` from peer `j`:

```text
isPreferred(T):
    return T = PT.pref

isStronglyPreferred(T):
    return ∀T' ∈ `Set T`, T' *<— T : isPreferred(T')

isAccepted(T):
    return
        ((∀T' ∈ `Set T`, T' <— T: isAccepted(T'))
            ∩ |PT|=1 ∩ PT.cnt ≥ β1)  safe early commitment
        ∪ (PT.cnt ≥ β2)              consecutive counter

onQuery(j, T):
    onReceiveTx(T)
    respond(, isStronglyPreferred(T))
```

The first step is to add transaction `T` to `Set T` unless it is already included.
After that step, `u` determines whether `T` is currently strongly preferred, in which case `u` returns a positive response to peer `j`, otherwise it returns a negative response.
In the example pseudocode it is assumed that if a node knows about `T`, then it recursively knows about `T`'s ancestry.

> This can be achieved by postponing the delivery of `T` until its entire ancestry is recursively fetched (in practice an additional gossip process that disseminates the transaction is used in parallel).

Author: What do you mean?

> This can be achieved by postponing the delivery of `T` until its entire ancestry is recursively fetched (in practice an additional gossip process that disseminates the transaction is used in parallel).

Reviewer 3: Oh, nothing, it's just that I love those little idiosyncrasies, and the term "gossip process" to describe the process of spreading information about a specific transaction between nodes is pretty cool.

> This can be achieved by postponing the delivery of `T` until its entire ancestry is recursively fetched (in practice an additional gossip process that disseminates the transaction is used in parallel).

Author: I have some issues with it, I dont like the word "gossip" and IMO these types of processes should have a more decent description, but thats a personal opinion, nobody asked me when they named their protocol and called a few other things like this :)
